Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we will learn how to use custom image sizes on the front end of our Web site.
So, for example, in our previous lesson, we added custom image sizes for portrait and landscape.
Right.
So WordPress will automatically generate all of these different sized images, different copies of the
same photo.
And now we just want to learn how to use the different sizes on the front end.
So as an example, on a professor detail screen like this, we would want to pull in an image that is
taller than it is wide.
So if we jump into our text editor and open up functions dot p HP, you'll remember in our previous
lesson that we created two new image sizes and we gave them nicknames of Professor Landscape and Professor
Portrait.
So if we want to use one of these sizes on the professor detail screen here, let's jump into the template
file that controls this screen, which is single Professor Dot BHP.
And if we scroll down a bit here, we see the code that is responsible for outputting the featured image
or the post thumbnail.
And all we need to do is go inside the parentheses for this function and for the argument.
We just type out the nickname of one of our image sizes.
So, for example, let's say Professor Portrait.
Go ahead and save that.
Cool.
And that's all it takes.
So now we can see we are using the portrait image here.
And then if we go back to the biology program page.
Remember, this screen is still using the really large high resolution copy of the image.
Right.
If I right.
Click and choose open image in New Tab.
You can see that this image is almost 5000 pixels wide.
So instead we want to pull in the image that uses our professor landscape image size here.
So the template file that controls this screen is single dash program dot BHP.
Let's scroll down a bit.
Here's the related professors custom query right below that.
Here's the while loop that controls the HDMI like it's generated for each professor.
Here we can see the function, the post thumbnail.
You are well, and let's just go inside the parentheses for that function and give it an argument of
our image size nickname.
So, Professor Landscape, let's go ahead and save that.
Cool, and if we test it out by right clicking and choose open image and new tab, we can see that image
is a reasonable four hundred pixels wide.
Cool.
OK.
Now, at this point, let's change gears a bit and talk about how our images are being cropped.
So, for example, if I click on to the miaows a lot detail screen, obviously this image was cropped
in order to create this portrait aspect ratio.
Now, by default, WordPress will crop towards the very center of the image.
Now, for this particular photo that worked, OK, but what if we had another photo where the subject
was off to the side?
So the question is, how can we have more control over how the images are getting cropped?
Well, let me show you something.
Back in our text editor, let's jump in two functions, dot p HP.
And you'll remember that when we created these new image sizes, we said cropping is set to true.
Now, a value of true will just cropped the image towards the center.
But if you want more control, you could provide an array.
And for the first value you could either say left, right or center.
And for the second value, we can say either top center or bottom right.
So the horizontal and vertical corner that you want to crop towards.
However, personally, I never use this feature because images are not all the same.
Right.
There's not a one size fits all cropping strategy for images.
So let's set that back to true.
And I'll show you what I do on Web sites where center based cropping is not what I want.
Right.
So what do I do when I need to crop each image differently?
Well, luckily, there's a perfect plug in for this situation.
So in the admen dashboard, lets hover over plug ins in the sidebar and click add new.
And let's use this search field to search for manual image crop.
And then the author's name is t o m a s z.
You do need to include the author's name in your search here in order to have this show up towards the
beginning of the results.
Now, yes, I will admit that this plugin has not been updated for five years, but as of June 2020,
in the latest version of WordPress, it still works perfectly for all of my projects.
So it's absolutely what I still recommend.
But you're free to look for other plugins after this lesson if you'd like to.
Anyways, let's go ahead and click install now and then.
Let's click activate.
OK.
And now let's give ourselves a goal.
Let's imagine that I want to crop this cat image differently.
So in the word press, admen, let's go into professors and let's edit the Dr. Miaows a lot post and
now over in the featured image area.
If we click on the featured image.
Well, now, right here, we see this new option of crop image.
So let's click on that.
And the first thing I want to draw your attention to are these different tabs up here.
So we see thumbnail professor landscape and professor portrait.
So I don't need to customize the thumbnail size.
But let's go ahead and click on Professor Landscape.
And now, if I try to resize this crop area, what's nice is it's automatically constrained to the aspect
ratio that we defined in our functions file.
So for the landscape, maybe I really want to zoom in tight on the cat's face like this, maybe a little
bit more exaggerated.
I'm happy with that.
So then if you scroll down a little bit, there's a crop it.
Button.
Let's click that.
Cool.
And now if I go back to the front end of my Web site and refresh this screen where we are pulling in
the professor landscape photo, woops.
Now, at first you'll see that the image did not change.
So this is not the new cropped version that we just created.
This has nothing to do with WordPress or the plugin we're using.
And it has everything to do with our Web browsers caching behavior.
Essentially, the new JPEG file that WordPress and the plugin created, it's using the exact same file
name as the previous version of the image.
So when you perform a normal refresh, you will not see the new image here.
However, if you perform a hard or full refresh, you will see it.
So to do that, you can just hold down the shift key on your keyboard while clicking the browsers reload
button.
Cool.
Notice now we do see the new cropped version.
And if we go to the detail screen that uses a portrait version, if we want to customize this crop back
in the admen, we can just scroll back up and click on the Professor Portrait Tab.
And now we are constrained to that aspect ratio.
So maybe I want to zoom in really tight on the cat's face like this.
Let's scroll down a little bit.
Click crop it.
And then if I jump back to the front end and refresh this screen initially, we will not see the new
image because our browser has already downloaded the old version with the same file name.
So, again, just performing hard or full refresh, hold down the shift key and reload.
And there is the new cropped version.
In the real world, this caching issue is not usually a problem because you're usually going to crop
the images when you first create the post.
That combined with the fact that most visitors will not have already viewed your professors.
And you can see how this is not going to be an issue on our live production Web site.
Now, not every Web site will need fine grained control over cropping like that, but I think this plugin
is a life saver if you want to have art direction over your different sizes of images.
Now, that's going to bring our focus on featured images to a close, but we are not done yet.
When it comes to learning how to manage uploaded images in our next lesson, we will finally learn how
to make this top banner area dynamic.
So in addition to replacing this annoying.
Don't forget to replace me later.
Text that I'm sure you've been staring at for this entire course in addition to making that dynamic.
We will also learn how to set things up so that each post and each page can upload its own unique background
image here.
Right.
Instead of this default fallback beach or ocean photo, learning how to set this up should be a lot
of fun.
Let's keep things rolling.
And I will see you in the next lesson.